---
layout: page
title: Research
tags: []
modified: 2014-08-08T20:53:07.573882-04:00
comments: false
image:
  feature:
  credit:
  creditlink: 
share: false
---
My research focuses on comparative political economy, i.e. I’m interested in how decisions in democratic countries impact economic outcomes and vice versa. Trained in both economics and politics in the midst of the deepest economic crisis since the Great Depression, I’m especially interested in the politics of economic crisis when existing laws and theories about how the economy functions do not hold anymore. In order to study these extraordinary times, I combine both quantitative and qualitative methods eclectically. At the moment, I work on the following research projects: 

**1) The Missing Left? Explaining the The Response of Social Democratic Parties to the Great Recession (PhD Thesis)**

The current economic crisis in Europe has also caused a crisis of social democracy. Following a brief period of ‘emergency Keynesianism’ shortly after the 2008 financial crisis, social democratic parties accepted austerity as the dogma of the day since 2010 and, thereby, proposed and implemented macroeconomic policies that are contrary to their general economic ideology. This has happened even in countries where the pressure from financial markets to consolidate state finances were weak or absent (e.g. Germany) and, hence, market pressures are not a sufficient explanation. Still, most of the existing literature attempts to explain this outcome by the institutional constraints that have been placed upon European politicians during the Great Recession. This thesis shifts the focus towards the popular coalitions that underlie socio-economic policy by examining both the elite *and* the popular politics of austerity in order to explain the policy-making process within social democratic parties. Uncovering the surprising amount of popular support for austerity among supporters of social democratic parties, the thesis argues that parties adopt policies that appeal to their electoral constituency. In the context of the Euro crisis, which was framed was a fiscal crisis of the state, social democratic parties faced voters, which were surprisingly supportive of austerity. Based on the iron logic of ‘folk economics’ that governments cannot spend more than they earn, many voters believed that austerity was necessary. In combination with lingering ideas from the Third Way among party leaders, these ‘electoral pressures’ were just as powerful as ‘market pressures’ and created the pre-conditions for the social democratic acceptance of austerity. Combining a larger quantitative analysis with four case studies, the thesis tests this argument by studying both the demand and the supply-side of politics in Western Europe. In this way, it attempts to bring the “electoral turn” to the ideational literature in political economy.

*Presentations:*

“What is left of the left? The Response of Left-Wing Parties to the Great Recession in Electoral Campaigns.” Presentation at the 23rd Annual Conference of Europeanists, Philadelphia, 14-16 April 2016. 

**2) Financialisation and Attitudes Towards the Welfare State** 

The financialisation of advanced capitalist economies has been one of the most important phenomenon of the last few decades, which had a profound effect on a large part of the population. In the wake of the recent financial crisis a lot of research has focused on the increasing importance of household debt in advanced capitalist countries. However, this literature ignores that most private households are not net debtors but net creditors, i.e. they save more than they borrow. Facing stagnating wages in a low-growth environment, citizens have increasingly invested in private assets, which has created a “society of rentiers” (Piketty, 2014). What are the political consequences of this process? Initial research by Ansell (2014) and Auf dem Brinke (2015) argues that wealth undermines support for redistributive policies and left-wing political parties because it acts as a substitute for public insurance. In my research, however, I theorise that this effect is mediated by two factors. First, the wealth effect depends on the type of assets that citizens hold because ill-liquid assets (like housing)  are less useful as buffer-stock savings. Second, the wealth effect is mediated by income because individuals have two reasons to support redistribution: they either support redistribution due to its first-order redistributive effect or due to its second-order insurance effect. While individuals with a low income and a high amount of wealth support social policies due former, individuals with a high income but a low amount of wealth support them for the latter reason. Thus, wealth only changes the attitudes of those citizens that are income and asset-rich while everyone else still remains supportive of redistribution. To test these hypotheses, I use data from the International Social Survey Programme for 22 OECD countries. I employ multilevel modelling to show that there is some evidence for my hypotheses: net creditors are indeed less supportive of government redistribution and left-wing parties but this wealth effect is small and depends on the type of assets that creditors own and the size of their income. While this is evidence that financialisation has complicated the preferences of citizen, it still shows that there is a surprising amount of support for redistribution across the advanced capitalist countries. Only individuals, who have a high income *and* a large amount of wealth are likely to oppose redistribution.

**3) From Boom to Bust: A Comparative Analysis of Greece and Spain under Austerity (with Guillem Vidal)**

The deep economic crisis caused by the financial crisis and the austerity policies imposed thereafter have shaken the foundations of the Greek and Spanish political systems. Massive protests and demonstrations preceded the emergence of new parties that put an end to their stable bi-partisan system. However, despite some general similarities, the economic and political consequences of the crisis have been substantially different in both countries. In Greece, a radical left party is in government and the economic situation does not appear to be improving. In Spain, there are some signs of recovery and the new challenger parties are different political animals. How can we explain such similarities and differences in the consequences of living under austerity in Greece and Spain? By comparing the experience of both countries, we argue that the economic crisis in Southern Europe did not only cause a political crisis, but that prior political developments also caused the economic crisis in the first place. In particular, irresponsible governments in Spain and Greece failed to regulate the pre-crisis boom effectively. Driven by incentives that derived from the ill-conceived institutional structure of the EU, they created a socio-economic environment, in which the economic crisis could only have the disruptive political consequences that we have witnessed. Consequently, the substantial differences in the restructuring of the party systems of both countries must be understood through a combination of pre-existing domestic conflicts and new conflicts brought about by the exceptional economic and political situation.

**4) Analysing the Weaknesses of the German Export-led Growth Model: Where is the Achilles Heel?**

*Note: This research is based on some research projects that I was involved in at the German Institute for Economic Research (DIW) from 2013 to 2015.*

While many countries in the Euro area are only slowly climbed out of the Great Recession, the German economy has been heralded a super-star in the last few years. Central to Germany’s success has been the strength of its export sector. Persistent current account surpluses have allowed the economy to grow at a robust pace since 2009 and reduced unemployment to the lowest level since unification. But internationally, the German export-led growth model has come under attack in the last few years. Reflecting a normative shift in the debate on the global and European macroeconomic imbalances, Germany has been criticised by the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the European Commission for creating a deflationary bias in the Eurozone. Importantly, these actors have not only criticised the German model but they have also argued that Germany’s export dependence is also sub-optimal for the German economy itself. In this paper, I argue that the German export-led growth model has become suboptimal for Germany for a different reason. By analysing the evolution of Germany’s net international investment position (NIIP), it shows that Germany has lost savings worth nearly 20% of GDP (equivalent to 650 billion U.S. dollars) from 2005 to 2012 and only regained some of these losses afterwards. This is the result of an institutional weakness of the German export-led model: in order to prevent inflationary capital inflows, Germany has to recycle its export profits in the international financial system, while foregoing productivity increasing investment opportunities in Germany. However, in an increasingly unstable international financial system this export of capital is very risky and can lead to large losses in times of financial crisis.

*Past publications:*

* Guido Baldi and Björn Bremer. 2015. “[The Evolution of Germany's Net Foreign Asset Position]({{ site.url }}/documents/publications/diw_econ_bull_2015-22-3.pdf).” DIW Economic Bulletin, 22+23/2015, pp. 303-309.
* Stefan Bach, Guido Baldi, Kerstin Bernoth, Björn Bremer, Beatrice Farkas, Ferdinand Fichtner, Marcel Fratzscher, and Martin Gornig. 2013. “[More Growth Through Higher Investment]({{ site.url }}/documents/publications/diw_econ_bull_2013-08-2.pdf).” DIW Economic Bulletin, 08/2013, pp. 5-16.