---
layout: post
title: "A New Face for Germany's Social Democrats? Why Martin Schulz Might Reinvigorate the SPD but Struggle on his Path Towards the Chancellery" 
excerpt: ""
tags: [German election, SPD, Schuzlz]
comments: true
---

Yesterday, the leadership of Germany’s Social Democratic Party (SPD) nominated Martin Schulz as its chancellor candidate for the German federal election in September 2017. The current leader of the party Sigmar Gabriel already announced on Tuesday that he would not seek the candidacy himself and instead suggested the former president of the European Parliament as the party’s Kanzlerkandidat. Since then a feeling of hope has gripped the SPD. More than 1,000 new members have joined the party and the party has jumped three percentage points in the most recent [opinion polls](http://www.sueddeutsche.de/politik/bundestagswahl-schulz-gibt-der-spd-mut-aber-keine-macht-1.3352274). Therefore, many people inside the party are optimistic that Martin Schulz will be able to reinvigorate the ailing SPD and rescue it from political insignificance.
 
The main advantage of Schulz’s candidacy is that the SPD will be able to compete with a fresh face in the elections. It will be led by someone who is a political outsider in Berlin and who is neither associated with the era of Gerhard Schröder nor with the two grand coalitions that were led by Angela Merkel. Therefore, and unlike the last two candidates of the SPD in 2009 and 2013, his reputation is not tainted by the centrist tendencies of the SPD in previous decades. Although he has been a member of the political establishment in Brussels for more than 20 years, he played no part in the domestic struggles of the SPD. This will help the party in the upcoming election because it frees Martin Schulz from some of the baggage of the party's recent history and allows him to push the party onto a path of progammatic renewal.

However, despite the new energy that Martin Schulz brings to Berlin, it is still very uncertain whether his candidacy will pave the way for a government that is led by the SPD. First, the SPD is coming from a very low level of support. In most opinion polls the party trails more than 10 percentage points behind the CDU/CSU. Importantly, Angela Merkel mostly recovered from the refugee crisis and according to [recent polls](http://www.forschungsgruppe.de/Umfragen/Politbarometer/Langzeitentwicklung_-_Themen_im_Ueberblick/Politik_II/#Politiker) she is nearly as popular as she was at the beginning of the electoral campaign in 2013, when she won the election with a resounding 41.5 percent of the vote. Moreover, the radical parties on both the left and the right end of political spectrum are presenting a major challenge to the SPD: *Die Linke* is still supported by many people, who abandoned the SPD after Schröder’s liberal reforms in the early 2000s, whereas the AfD more recently attracted former social democratic voters with its Euro-sceptic and anti-immigration stance. Thus, political competition is pulling the SPD apart and Martin Schulz will struggle to simultaneously appeal to the different constituencies that have abandoned the SPD.

Second, Martin Schulz’s status as an outsider in Berlin is not only an advantage but also a disadvantage. He does not have a large network of support in Berlin and it remains to be seen whether he will be able to navigate the many lines of conflict within the SPD and the political arena in Berlin more generally. Additionally, many people still do not know what Martin Schulz stands for except for a deep commitment towards Europe. Therefore, he quickly needs to create a domestic profile and set out the differences between Angela Merkel and himself, between the CDU/CSU and the SPD. In the last few months, he was only marginally involved in the SPD commission that was given the task to develop programmatic guidelines for the 2017 election and that published a [discussion paper](https://www.spd.de/fileadmin/Dokumente/Sonstiges__Papiere_et_al_/161121_Impulse_der_Programmkommission.pdf) at the end of last year. The paper is expected to form the backbone of the party’s electoral programme but Martin Schulz needs leave his own mark on the party’s election programme. Otherwise, he will struggle – much like Peer Steinbrück and Frank-Walter Steinmeier did previously – to authentically represent the new programme of the SPD.

However, even if Martin Schulz overcomes these challenges, he will still need to find coalition partners that would join a government led by the SPD after the election. Many people on the left - both [inside](http://www.zeit.de/politik/deutschland/2016-10/rot-rot-gruen-bundestag-koalition-treffen) and [outside](http://foreignpolicy.com/2016/12/21/merkel-must-go-germany-europe-free-world/) of Germany - are hoping that the SPD will finally be able to put together a coalition of the SPD, *Die Linke*, and the Green party. Yet, Martin Schulz is not in the best position to build such a coalition: he originally comes from the centrist-wing of the SPD and unlike Sigmar Gabriel his political contacts in Berlin do not reach far into other parties. Consequently, the Greens and *Die Linke* [reacted cautiously](http://www.spiegel.de/politik/deutschland/martin-schulz-reaktionen-von-spd-cdu-gruenen-und-linken-a-1131630.html) after Schulz’s candidacy was announced last week as both parties are uncertain what to expect from him. Still, the signs from *Die Linke* and the Greens are not necessarily encouraging for Schulz. *Die Linke* remains divided between a pragmatic wing that would like to join a coalition government and one that remains opposed to a collaboration with the SPD. Until this day, it is not clear whether this internal conflict will be resolved by September 2017. Similarly, the Greens are split into two wings but the recent election of Katrin Göring-Eckardt and Cem Özdemir as the [party’s front-runners](http://www.zeit.de/politik/deutschland/2017-01/bundestagswahl-gruene-waehlen-cem-oezdemir-zum-zweiten-spitzenkandidaten) for the election can be interpreted as a signal that the centrist wing is gaining the upper hand. As a result, a coalition between the CDU/CSU and the Greens is also more than a flickering possibility, which would leave the SPD bereft of its “natural coalition partner”. Therefore, the greatest obstacles for Martin Schulz on his way towards the chancellery might be largely outside of his control. Even if he succeeds in reinvigorating the ailing SPD, his path to power still remains very uncertain.
